#labels Featured
= GCMUtils AndroidManifest generator =
One of the more error-prone and tedious tasks of creating a GCM project is to add the correct manifest entries. The GCMUtils AndroidManifest generator is created to make this process fast and simple.

The manifest generator will automatically generate the required manifest entries for a GCM app.

There are two main ways to use the manifest generator:

  # *[#1._Maven_plugin Maven plugin]*
  # *[#2._Java_application Java application]*

----

== 1. Maven plugin ==
  # Include the Google code repositories in you pom.xml
{{{
<repositories>
  <repository>
  <id>gcmutils-repo-releases</id>
  <url>http://gcmutils.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/repository/releases</url>
</repository>
<repository>
  <id>gcmutils-repo-snapshots</id>
  <url>http://gcmutils.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/repository/snapshots</url>
  </repository>
</repositories>
}}}
  # Add the following plugin-tag:
{{{
<build>
  <plugins>
    <plugin>
      <groupId>net.jarlehansen.android.gcm.plugins</groupId>
      <artifactId>gcmutils-maven-plugin</artifactId>
      <version>${project.parent.version}</version>
        <configuration>
          <manifestPath>my-folder/AndroidManifest.xml</manifestPath> <!-- Optional -->
          <skipBackup>true</skipBackup> <!-- Optional -->
        </configuration>
      </plugin>
    </plugins>
  </build>
}}}
*Configuration values:*
|| manifestPath || the path to your manifest-file. Default = AndroidManifest.xml. ||
|| skipBackup || If set to true, no backup-file is created. Default = false. ||

  # Execute the following command to run the plugin:
{{{
  mvn gcmutils:manifest
}}}

By default (the skipBackup configuration) the gcmutils-maven-plugin will automatically create a backup file, called AndroidManifest-backup.xml. If anything wrong happens, you will still have your original AndroidManifest.xml-file available. It is recommended to keep the backup-feature enabled, if everything is generated successfully you can delete the backup-file.

If you have a standard Android maven setup you do not need to add any configuration-options.

----

==2. Java application==
  # Download the gcmutils-maven.jar from [http://code.google.com/p/gcmutils/downloads/list Downloads].
  # To generate the manifest tags, run the command:
{{{
java -jar gcmutils-main.jar AndroidManifest.xml my.package.name
}}}

If you want to skip the creation of the backup-file, add the system property _-DskipBackup=true_.