#labels Featured
The gcmutils-maven-plugin provides two main features:
  # *[#Manifest_generator Manifest generator]*
  # *[#Test_server Test server]*

To include the gcmutils-maven-plugin in your own project, add the following:
{{{
<pluginRepositories>
  <pluginRepository>
    <id>gcmutils-pluginrepo-releases</id>
    <url>http://gcmutils.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/repository/releases</url>
  </pluginRepository>
</pluginRepositories>

<plugin>
  <groupId>net.jarlehansen.android.gcm.plugins</groupId>
  <artifactId>gcmutils-maven-plugin</artifactId>
  <version>LATEST_VERSION</version>
  <configuration>
    <manifestPath>my-folder/AndroidManifest.xml</manifestPath> <!-- Optional -->
    <skipBackup>true</skipBackup> <!-- Optional -->
  <!-- <apiKey></apiKey> Should be included as System property or in settings.xml -->
  </configuration>
</plugin>
}}}

----

==Manifest generator==

One of the more error-prone and tedious tasks when creating a GCM project is to add the correct manifest entries. The GCMUtils `AndroidManifest` generator is created to make this process fast and simple.

The manifest generator automatically generates the required manifest entries for a GCM app. By running either the maven plugin or the Java application, it will scan your existing `AndroidManifest.xml` file and add the missing tags.

There are two main ways to use the manifest generator:
  * [#Manifest_generator_maven_plugin Maven plugin]
  * [#Manifest_generator_Java_application Java application]
 

===Manifest generator maven plugin===
Execute the following command to run the plugin:
{{{
mvn gcmutils:gcmify
}}}
*Configuration values:*
|| manifestPath || the path to your manifest-file. Default = `AndroidManifest.xml`. ||
|| skipBackup || If set to true, no backup-file is created. Default = false.||

By default (the skipBackup configuration) the gcmutils-maven-plugin will automatically create a backup file, called `AndroidManifest-backup.xml`. If anything wrong happens, you will still have your original `AndroidManifest.xml`-file available. It is recommended to keep the backup-feature enabled, if everything is generated successfully you can delete the backup-file.

If you have a standard Android maven setup you do not need to add any configuration-options.

===Manifest generator Java application===
  # Download the gcmutils-maven.jar from Downloads.
  # To generate the manifest tags, run the command:
{{{
java -jar gcmutils-main.jar AndroidManifest.xml my.package.name
}}}

If you want to skip the creation of the backup-file, add the system property `-DskipBackup=true`.

----

==Test server==
The gcmutils-maven-plugins provides a very simple test server for GCM. This makes it easy to test your application locally with a fully functional server implementation. It is also created to integrate with the GCMUtils client library.

The test server offers registration/unregistration service (storing the regIds in memory) and provides a webpage that makes it easy to send test messages to the devices.

To start the test server execute the following command:
{{{
mvn gcmutils:run-server
}}}

*Configuration values*
|| apiKey || The API key is created in [https://code.google.com/apis/console/ Google APIs console] and is used when sending messages to the registered devices.
It is recommended to add the apiKey value to either a system property when running the command (_gcmutils:run-server `-DapiKey`=_) or in the .m2/settings.xml file ||
|| port || The port number that the server will run on, default value=9595 ||
|| contextRoot || The context root of the webapp, default="/" ||